031120update.md

- [Revised Risk Assessment](#revised-risk-assessment)
- [An important quote on tragedy](#an-important-quote-on-tragedy)

## Revised Risk Assessment

I think there's been sufficient spread of the virus in the US and enough
evidence of community spread that I am revising my thoughts. I am
personally limiting my public exposure to essential activities only, and
I am making the same recommendations to my friends, family, and clients.

I will of course be working in the hospital, but other than this, I plan
only to go to my home until there is a better understanding of the
rapidity of spread and the severity of disease in my community. I am
taking a proactive and cautious approach rather than a reactive
approach, which right now might make me look like an alarmist. I hope I
am wrong, but the opposite choice seems like it could be too costly. 

I think, based on available data, the chance of a young person, roughly
age 20-40 who is otherwise healthy, becoming critically ill or dying is
still quite low, but definitely not 0. For this reason, I am comparing
this very unlikely, but catastrophic outcome, to its alternative. And
for me personally, there is nothing I'd rather do than keep living. I am
also sensitive to the fact that as an ER doctor, I am at an increased
risk of exposure, and given the average of 9 days of asymptomatic viral
shedding that is theorized to take place, I do not want to expose
friends, family, or members of the public. 

Given that there is no vaccine and only experimental treatments, the best strategy I can see for individuals is to reduce the likelihood of becoming infected at the same time as many other people, and to reduce the chance of multiple family members becoming infected simultaneously as well. Giving yourself more time means that the medical community has more time to learn how to best diagnose, prognosticate, and treat this infection. You'll also give yourself time to benefit from any pharmacologic achievements, of which we are sorely in need. 

## An important quote on tragedy

> "We do not think that tragedy is our natural state. We do not live in
> chronic dread of disaster. We do not expect disaster until we have
> specific reason to expect it, and when we encounter it, we are free to
> fight it. It is not happiness, but suffering, that we consider
> unnatural. It is not success but calamity that we regard as the
> abnormal exception in human life."
>
> http://bit.ly/2xqqCEF
