031920update.md

- [Optimism?](#optimism)
- [Healthcare Readiness](#healthcare-readiness)
- [Prevention and Treatment](#prevention-and-treatment)
- [Silver Linings](#silver-linings)

## Optimism?

Despite social distancing, the threat seems to remain high. What is
notable, however, if you look at the [Hopkins
Map](https://www.arcgis.com/apps/opsdashboard/index.html#/bda7594740fd40299423467b48e9ecf6)
of Covid-19 cases, is that major metropolitan areas such as NYC and
Seattle are really suffering, whereas other areas don't seem to be.
South Carolina for instance, where I live, still only has 60 cases as of
this morning, and only 1 in Spartanburg County. It appears, at least for
the moment, that those of us who live in more suburban or rural
environments may be spared an extremely rapid spread of this disease.

That's not to say, however, that a few unfortunate events, such as the
spread of the virus within a nursing home or similar facility wouldn't
place undue strain on a particular local health system. Overall, I am
cautiously optimistic that the spread of this virus within the majority
of the country will be attenuated by social distancing and by our
relatively low population density and personal interactions as compared
perhaps to Wuhan or Milan.

## Healthcare Readiness

Much has been said over the past week about "flattening the curve" so
that health care resources can meet demands. Based on discussions with
colleagues, it seems as though many health systems are in an aggressive
preparation stage. I believe that within the next 2-8 weeks, most health
systems will likely be far better prepared than they were 1-2 weeks ago,
and that in areas with less dense populations, it seems quite possible
that there will be adequate resources to take care of sick patients.
Many epidemiologic models predict that the nation's \# of ICU beds and
\# of ventilators will fall far short of critically ill patients in the
coming months, but my analysis is a bit more nuanced. I may turn out to
be wrong, and I am certainly not an expert in this area, but I think
that rather than an even distribution of scarcity of resources, what
will more likely happen is a regional resource mismatch.

What I mean is that, as mentioned above, areas like NYC may struggle to
care for a huge spike in critically ill patients, whereas a more
suburban or rural area may have excess ICU beds and ventilators. Perhaps
these resources will be redistributed over time, or patients will be
moved around by the voluntary cooperation of health systems, but my
feeling is that small communities will have smaller outbreaks, which
occur slower, and may be adequately cared for.

## Prevention and Treatment

There is no specific medication or vaccine yet developed for prevention.
The actions I am taking at this time are to avoid close contact, perform
maniacal hand hygiene, avoid self-inoculation (by touching the mucous
membranes of the eyes, nose, and mouth), and to obtain adequate sleep,
nutrition, exercise, and stress management (see previous post below for
specific suggestions).

Medications have been discussed in the news and by the president today
-- most notably, Chloroquine and Hydroxychloroquine. Based on the data
I've reviewed ([which can be found
here](https://www.zotero.org/groups/2437331/kornweiss_medical/collections/RIX65M55)),
I have no reason to believe that either of these medications (or other
experimental treatments that are being used in other countries) is going
to make a huge difference in this disease. These data are low quality
and premature, but I wouldn't be relying on these drugs as a cure by any
means. The best plan at this point remains avoiding the disease. Given a
limited supply of the drug, its side effects, and that it is an unproven
therapy for Covid-19, doctors, especially at first, will be unlikely to
prescribe this for prophylaxis or for treatment of mild cases in
"low-risk" individuals.

## Silver Linings

Despite the overwhelming feeling that the world is coming to an end,
there are a number of silver-linings here.

1.  The virus and the disease it causes are being aggressively studied
    and are becoming better understood. Even if we are months or years
    away from better treatments or a vaccine, supportive care will
    improve, and I believe morbidity and mortality along with it.
2.  Doctors and nurses have a lot of skin in the game. This virus is a
    threat to us all, even relatively young healthy people. Doctors and
    nurses always want their patients to do well, but this is even more
    the case on an emotional level when the disease that threatens the
    patient is also a threat to the doctor or nurse.
3.  Because this disease is a pandemic, and there is a national
    emergency, people are getting out of the way. The normal rules and
    regulations that hamper health systems, scientists, pharmacology
    companies, doctors, and nurses are being withdrawn so that brilliant
    people can fix this problem. Medical licensing regulations are being
    relaxed, the FDA is fast-tracking medications and vaccine trials,
    and CMS is making exceptions for telehealth to operate the way that
    it should. It's more likely than not that geniuses will bail us all
    out of this mess if we let them, and we should thank them for it
    endlessly.
4.  I've spoken to many friends and family who report that this time
    period, though scary, is one of the most relaxed, still periods
    they've had in their lives.
5.  The next phase of this situation is likely coming as the
    availability of testing increases. My hope is that, once we have the
    ability to test people at will, including antibody testing to
    identify those who may have immunity to the disease, we'll be able
    to identify those who need to self-quarantine and those who can
    resume their daily lives. This should happen quickly, and as it
    does, we can get back to doing what we all do best.

As always, please feel free to contact me with questions, comments,
corrections, or disagreements.