# Compilation of all Covid-19 mRNA Vaccine Related Content

I’ll be updating this page each time I publish new content related to
the vaccine so that you can find all mRNA vaccine related information in
one place.

Last updated: January 11, 2021

## Covid-19 mRNA Vaccine Efficacy

*Originally published in [Newsletter Vol.2
№1](https://kornweissmedical.com/newsletter-edition-no-4/) – January 10,
2021*

I’ve been asked several times recently what it means that the vaccine is
“95% effective.”

It *does not* mean that 95 times out of 100 exposures an individual is
protected from contracting Covid. It *does not* mean that symptoms are
reduced by 95% in vaccinated patients who contract Covid – though there
likely is a symptom-mitigating effect in vaccinees who contract Covid.

It *does* mean that the vaccine is effective in preventing symptomatic
infection in members of a group of recipients compared to individuals in
a placebo group of non-recipients. But, to get a more concrete idea of
exactly how effective this vaccine is, it’s worth looking at the actual
numbers from the clinical trial and the trial definition of “vaccine
efficacy.”

**From the most recent publication in NEJM regarding the Pfizer BioNTech
Covid-mRNA Vaccine:**

Source: <https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2034577>

“Among 36,523 participants who had no evidence of existing or prior
SARS-CoV-2 infection, 8 cases of Covid-19 with onset at least 7 days
after the second dose were observed among vaccine recipients and 162
among placebo recipients. This case split corresponds to 95.0% vaccine
efficacy (95% confidence interval \[CI\], 90.3 to 97.6; Table 2).”

**How was vaccine efficacy calculated?**

“Vaccine efficacy was estimated by 100×(1−IRR), where IRR is the
calculated ratio of confirmed cases of Covid-19 illness per 1000
person-years of follow-up in the active vaccine group to the
corresponding illness rate in the placebo group.”

**Let’s look at the actual numbers.**

[![Figure 3. Efficacy of BNT162b2 against Covid-19 after the First
Dose.](https://www.nejm.org/na101/home/literatum/publisher/mms/journals/content/nejm/2020/nejm_2020.383.issue-27/nejmoa2034577/20210108/images/img_xlarge/nejmoa2034577_f3.jpeg)](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2034577)

In the vaccine group, only 9 out of 21,669 participants tested positive
for Covid-19 during a roughly 100 day surveillance period after the 2nd
vaccine dose.

So, in this time period, the rate of infection in vaccine recipients was
9 out of 21,669 – 0.04%. In other words, 99.96% of vaccine recipients
did not have symptomatic Covid-19 during the surveillance period.
Compare this to 172 out of 21,686 in the placebo group – 0.8%. This is
still a low infection rate, but it is nearly 20 times the infection rate
in the vaccine group.

It is important to realize that many people were neither exposed nor
tested during the surveillance period. Exposure was dependent on
participant behavior, and testing was dependent on reporting of
symptoms. There is no reason to believe these factors were unbalanced
between the vaccine and placebo groups, but nonetheless, some caution
must be used in interpretation of efficacy for these reasons.

However, whichever way you slice this, the bottom line is that the
vaccine does in fact appear to be remarkably effective at preventing
Covid-19 infections.

## Allergic Reactions to the Covid-19 mRNA Vaccine

*Originally published in [Newsletter Edition
No.3](https://kornweissmedical.com/newsletter-3-122720/) – December 27,
2020*

Several days ago, I read with interest [this
report](https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2020/12/suspicions-grow-nanoparticles-pfizer-s-covid-19-vaccine-trigger-rare-allergic-reactions)
from sciencemag.org that discusses the possibility that the half-dozen
or so severe allergic reactions to the Covid-19 mRNA vaccine may be due
to a component of the vaccine called polyethylene glycol. To understand
what’s happening with this, it’s important to understand the composition
and function of the vaccine.

According to [this information
sheet](https://www.fda.gov/media/144638/download) from the FDA, “The
Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine contains the following ingredients: messenger
ribonucleic acid (mRNA), lipids (SM-102, polyethylene glycol \[PEG\]
2000 dimyristoyl glycerol \[DMG\], cholesterol, and
1,2-distearoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine \[DSPC\]), tromethamine,
tromethamine hydrochloride, acetic acid, sodium acetate, and sucrose.”
The Pfizer vaccine has similar components.

Messenger ribonucleic acid, or
[mRNA](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MRNA&redirect=no) for
short, is a template molecule that allows a cell to construct a
particular protein. Under normal circumstances, mRNA is formed in the
nucleus of a cell by a process called DNA transcription. Once the mRNA
is created, it leaves the nucleus and enters the cytoplasm of a cell to
serve as a template for protein synthesis before being degraded and
recycled.

One challenge with the development of the Covid-19 mRNA vaccine, as I
understand it, was to figure out how to reliably deliver intact mRNA
into a cell from the outside-in. To accomplish this, scientists enclosed
the mRNA within a lipid vehicle (a sphere of fat - like a droplet of
oil). This “synthetic” fat droplet is able to fuse with a human cell
membrane and deliver mRNA into the cytoplasm of the cell where it serves
as the template for the synthesis of the SARS-CoV-2 spike protein.

The scientists and engineers who designed the lipid vehicle added a
chemical group to the lipid particles called polyethylene glycol (PEG
for short), in a process appropriately called
“[pegylation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PEGylation#:~:text=PEGylation%20(or%20pegylation)%20is%20the,is%20then%20described%20as%20PEGylated.).”
This is a technique that has been used for several purposes in various
pharmacologic applications. In the case of the Covid-19 mRNA vaccine,
pegylation may have been used to stabilize the lipid vehicle. It’s
possible that some severe reactions to the vaccine are due to PEG.

To my knowledge, though some of these reactions have been severe and
have even required hospitalization, all have been temporary and
treatable with typical medications: epinephrine, antihistamines, and
steroids.

**So, what to do?**

It might be reasonable if you’ve had a severe allergic reaction to PEG,
or to another component of the vaccine (listed above), to await
confirmation of the source of these reactions, or to avoid the vaccine
altogether. This decision of course has to be balanced with your risk of
contracting and becoming severely ill with, or dying from, Covid-19
itself. This calculation must be done on an individual basis. For those
with known anaphylaxis, or severe allergic reactions, but without known
reactions to specific components of the vaccine, it’s likely just as
safe to receive the vaccine as it is to be exposed to many other
unfamiliar medications, foods, or chemicals.

I’ve yet to see expert commentary on preventive measures such as
pre-medication with antihistamines (e.g. diphenhydramine) or steroids
(e.g. prednisone). But, I think that pre-medication could theoretically
be a viable strategy for at-risk vaccine recipients as long as those
medications don’t blunt the immunogenic response to the vaccine.

If you do have a history of allergic reactions, you should have at least
one, but probably two or more epinephrine auto-injectors in your
possession, and one on your person (or at least nearby) at all times.
You should also know how and when to use one.

Even those without a history of allergic reactions can save a life with
an epinephrine auto-injector. It’s a good idea to ask your doctor for a
prescription for one of these regardless of your allergy history.

At this point, the vaccines still appear extremely safe and effective.
Keep in mind that despite headlines, only 5-10 severe reactions have
been reported in over one-half million doses given thus far. Stay tuned
for another update in two weeks.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Covid-19 mRNA Vaccine Update – Pfizer vaccine data

*Originally Published in [Newsletter Edition
No.2](https://us4.campaign-archive.com/?u=982343cab2192ff2ea2e671f4&id=01008ed9c2)
– December 13, 2020*

Two weeks ago, I published [an
article](https://kornweissmedical.com/covid-19-mrna-vaccine-information/)
reviewing the data on the mRNA vaccine for Covid-19. Most of the data I
reviewed at that time was with regard to the Moderna vaccine.

In the interim, additional information has been released in NEJM about
the Pfizer-BioNTech mRNA vaccine demonstrating a similar safety and
efficacy profile. You can read that NEJM article
[here](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMoa2022483).

[Another
article](https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2032195?query=recirc_mostViewed_railB_article)
in NEJM was released on December 3, 2020 demonstrating persistent
antibody mediated immunity for Sars-CoV-2 induced by the Moderna vaccine
up to 119 days after the first vaccination. Here is an excerpt:

> At day 119, the binding and neutralizing GMTs exceeded the median GMTs
> in a panel of 41 controls who were convalescing from Covid-19, with a
> median of 34 days since diagnosis (range, 23 to 54).2 No serious
> adverse events were noted in the trial, no prespecified trial-halting
> rules were met, and no new adverse events that were considered by the
> investigators to be related to the vaccine occurred after day 57.

What does all of this mean? It means that both companies seem to have
produced extremely effective vaccines. The safety profiles appear to be
excellent. The first non-trial recipients have been vaccinated in the
past week. If there are any unforeseen major issues, they should come to
light within the next 4-8 weeks. Let us hope that none do.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Covid-19 mRNA Vaccine Information
*Information on how mRNA vaccines work, how they’re developed, and Moderna vaccine efficacy and safety data*

*Originally published in this
[article](https://kornweissmedical.com/covid-19-mrna-vaccine-information/)
– November, 29, 2020*

### Summary

The
[Moderna](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moderna#COVID-19_vaccine_candidate)
and Pfizer mRNA vaccines, which are likely to be available within the
next 1-3 months, have been **successfully tested in non-human primates
and humans**. In the non-human primates, the vaccine appears to
stimulate the formation of **antibodies that inhibit viral replication
and prevent symptomatic Covid-19 disease** in animals exposed to the
virus. Human clinical trials also appear successful with a ten fold
smaller incidence of symptomatic Covid-19 infections in vaccine
recipients as compared to a placebo group. At this time, **no severe
adverse events have been reported** in vaccine recipients.

There is good reason to believe that the vaccine will confer immunity
for at least several months, and possibly years, for almost all
recipients including those over age 70.

There is no evidence that I am aware of at this time that the vaccine
poses any long term danger to its recipients.

Most of what follows is based on data from the Moderna vaccine and its
trials. I think it’s most likely that this vaccine will be more widely
available than the Pfizer vaccine given that it can be stored at
temperatures achievable by many freezers, whereas the Pfizer vaccine is
currently said to require temperatures far colder.

I’ll also say at the outset, I am not an expert in infectious disease or
in vaccines. I have done my best to understand and organize publicly
available information. My references are listed at the bottom of the
page. Please contact me if you have any questions or corrections.

### How does it work?

The Moderna and Pfizer vaccines are mRNA vaccines. This vaccine
technology is not a *brand new* idea, but it’s my understanding that
this will be the first time it is used in humans for an infectious
disease.

The vaccine is a solution composed of messenger RNA (mRNA) inside of
lipid nanoparticles and then diluted in sterile saline solution
(i.e. salt water). The vaccine is injected into the muscle, and the
lipid nanoparticles are taken up by muscle cells. Once in the cell, the
mRNA is translated into a protein.

You can see an animation of mRNA translation in [this Youtube
video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TfYf_rPWUdY).

The vaccine mRNA contains the genetic code for a slightly modified
version of the SARS-Cov-2 spike protein (the protein that’s responsible
for binding to the ACE2 receptor on our cells in order to gain entry and
cause infection). In essence, the vaccine causes our own cells to
manufacture a viral protein, which can then be recognized by our immune
system. Immune cells then create new antibodies (which are also
proteins), that recognize the viral protein. When an individual with
antibodies encounters the actual virus, the antibodies bind to the virus
and tag it for destruction by immune cells. This is the primary means by
which the Moderna mRNA vaccine will generate immunity – by generating
antibodies\[mfn\]\[1\]:K. S. Corbett *et al.*, “Evaluation of the
mRNA-1273 Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in Nonhuman Primates,” *N. Engl. J.
Med.*, vol. 383, no. 16, pp. 1544–1555, Oct. 2020, doi:
[10.1056/NEJMoa2024671](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2024671)\[/mfn\].
It also appears that there may be some T-cell mediated immunity from
vaccination as well.

This particular vaccine requires two injections (3 or 4 weeks apart from
one another) to ensure that a sufficient quantity of neutralizing
antibodies are produced. Though it’s possible that some individuals will
have sufficient immunity from a single dose, you won’t know it, and thus
it’s likely that two doses will be recommended for all recipients.

### Is it safe and how do we know?

The Moderna vaccine has been in development since January, and has been
given to a diverse population of over 30,000 participants in clinical
trials since March 16, with no severe adverse events documented thus
far.

The manufacture of the first clinical batch was completed on Feb 7,
2020. The first participant in the first phase of clinical testing was
dosed on March 16, 2020. On May 29, the second phase of clinical testing
resulted in the recruitment of 300 people age 18-55, and another 300
over age 55. Phase three is a randomized placebo-controlled study of
30,000 participants over age 18, enrollment of which was completed on
October 22, 2020. More than 7,000 of the participants are over age 65;
5,000 are under age 65 but have significant comorbid conditions
(e.g. diabetes, obesity, cardiac disease); 11,000 participants are from
“communities of color,” with 6,000 who “identify as Hispanic or
LatinX,”; and over 3,000 who “identify as Black or African
American”\[mfn\]\[2\]:“Moderna’s COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate Meets its
Primary Efficacy Endpoint in the First Interim Analysis of the Phase 3
COVE Study \| Moderna, Inc.” Accessed: Jan. 06, 2021. \[Online\].
Available:
<https://investors.modernatx.com/news-releases/news-release-details/modernas-covid-19-vaccine-candidate-meets-its-primary-efficacy/>\[/mfn\].

One safety concern is the interaction of the vaccine with the immune
system. Explicitly, some are concerned that antibodies produced as a
result of vaccination could cause a subsequent Covid-19 infection to
actually be more severe. One way this could happen is through a syndrome
called “vaccine associated enhanced respiratory disease” (VAERD).

VAERD occurs when a vaccine recipient makes antibodies that **bind** to
a viral protein, **but that do not fully neutralize the virus**. In this
case, the virus, now bound to this antibody, could “hyper-activate” the
immune system, so to speak. This “hyper-activation” could cause a more
severe response to viral infection than would have occurred without
vaccination.

According to researchers, this risk has been mitigated by ensuring the
antibodies produced by vaccine recipients are “potently neutralizing,”
and that Th2-biased CD4 T-cell responses are avoided\[mfn\]\[1\]:K. S.
Corbett *et al.*, “Evaluation of the mRNA-1273 Vaccine against
SARS-CoV-2 in Nonhuman Primates,” *N. Engl. J. Med.*, vol. 383, no. 16,
pp. 1544–1555, Oct. 2020, doi:
[10.1056/NEJMoa2024671](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2024671)\[/mfn\].

### Is it effective and how do we know?

It appears that the vaccine is highly effective at preventing Covid-19
infection.

At a dose of 100 mcg, after 8 weeks, non-human primates were exposed
directly to virus by the intranasal and the intratracheal route. This
means that animals were given doses of virus into their noses and lungs.
Seven days later, there was no measurable viral RNA or viral antigen
within the respiratory tract of the vaccinated animals. The animals were
then sacrificed. Researchers examined their lungs for signs of infection
and inflammation - none was found. This means that vaccinated animals
were able to clear the virus from their noses and lungs rapidly after
exposure and that the virus did not leave any evidence of damage in its
wake.

In addition to this animal experiment, human clinical trial data shows
that neutralizing antibodies are produced in amounts equal to or greater
than that produced by natural infection. This response was seen across
age groups, including recipients over age 70 (the vaccine has not been
tested in people under age 18).

Furthermore, in ongoing clinical trials, roughly one tenth of vaccinated
humans have developed symptomatic Covid-19 infection in comparison to
the placebo group.

### Will it prevent transmission?

It will probably attenuate transmission significantly. It appears that
viral replication in the nasopharynx is diminished in vaccinated
non-human primates, suggesting that the vaccine may be very helpful in
limiting transmission for at least three reasons: i) decreased viral
replication, ii) decreased duration of viral carriage, iii) decreased
number of infected individuals in a vaccinated population at a given
time.

### What are the “side effects,” from vaccination?

Based on phase 2 data, it appears as though many recipients will have at
least one “mild,” or “moderate” symptom from vaccination. The reported
symptoms will be familiar to almost everyone: headache, myalgia
(i.e. body or muscle aches), arthralgia (i.e. joint aches), injection
site pain, and fatigue. Very few recipients had fever or
chills\[mfn\]\[3\]:E. J. Anderson *et al.*, “Safety and Immunogenicity
of SARS-CoV-2 mRNA-1273 Vaccine in Older Adults,” *N. Engl. J. Med.*,
vol. 0, no. 0, p. null, Sep. 2020, doi:
[10.1056/NEJMoa2028436](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2028436)\[/mfn\].

I have seen anecdotes that the reaction to the second dose of vaccine in
particular may be more significant than most people are accustomed to
feeling with familiar vaccines such as the flu vaccine.

### Will the vaccine be useful in those previously infected with Covid-19?

I haven’t seen any data or expert commentary to support this one way or
the other. However, quantity of neutralizing antibody seems to be
significantly higher in vaccine recipients compared to post-Covid
patients who donated convalescent plasma. There has also been evidence
of waning immunity months after infection. Thus, it follows that
vaccination might be beneficial even for those previously infected.

Furthermore, researchers surmise that vaccination will confer improved
immunity as compared to natural infection for several additional (and
highly technical) reasons that you can read about
[here](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2024671).

### What is the onset and duration of immunity?

Based on animal and human data, a vaccine recipient will likely develop
immunity by **6 or 7 weeks after the first of two
injections**\[mfn\]\[1\]:K. S. Corbett *et al.*, “Evaluation of the
mRNA-1273 Vaccine against SARS-CoV-2 in Nonhuman Primates,” *N. Engl. J.
Med.*, vol. 383, no. 16, pp. 1544–1555, Oct. 2020, doi:
[10.1056/NEJMoa2024671](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2024671)\[/mfn\].
is administered. The duration of immunity (i.e. the period of time that
a vaccine recipient will be immune after vaccination) is currently
unknown, but based on antibody data from natural infection, it’s
reasonable to assume that vaccine generated immunity will last at least
three months, but probably much longer (perhaps a year or two according
to some experts). There are several reasons to believe that vaccine
generated immunity will be more potent than immunity from natural
infection.

### Will I be taking it?

I will most likely take the vaccine, but not until at least two months
after the vaccine has been rolled out – (*point of clarification – two
months after the delivery of the last dose in clinical trials*).

I am adopting this strategy based on the interview of Paul Offit, MD,
who appeared on Peter Attia’s Podcast several weeks ago. As an
infectious disease and vaccine expert, and member of the FDA advisory
board for the Covid-19 vaccine, Paul pointed out that for serious
vaccine side effects that have occurred with other vaccines - Polio,
Flu, Measles, and Yellow Fever vaccines - the severe adverse effects
were discovered within two months of vaccine availability, but not
necessarily before.

I highly recommend listening to [Peter Attia’s podcast episode featuring
Paul Offit, MD](https://peterattiamd.com/pauloffit/). In the interview,
he provides fascinating historical context and detailed information
about Covid-19 vaccination.

If I were at higher risk for severe Covid-19 (i.e. over age 65 and/or
suffered from -comorbid conditions such as diabetes, hypertension,
obesity, etc), then I may be more likely to take the vaccine as soon as
humanly possible.

### References

\[1\]: K. S. Corbett *et al.*, “Evaluation of the mRNA-1273 Vaccine
against SARS-CoV-2 in Nonhuman Primates,” *N. Engl. J. Med.*, vol. 383,
no. 16, pp. 1544–1555, Oct. 2020, doi:
[10.1056/NEJMoa2024671](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2024671).

\[2\]: “Moderna’s COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate Meets its Primary Efficacy
Endpoint in the First Interim Analysis of the Phase 3 COVE Study \|
Moderna, Inc.” Accessed: Jan. 06, 2021. \[Online\]. Available:
<https://investors.modernatx.com/news-releases/news-release-details/modernas-covid-19-vaccine-candidate-meets-its-primary-efficacy/>.

\[3\]: E. J. Anderson *et al.*, “Safety and Immunogenicity of SARS-CoV-2
mRNA-1273 Vaccine in Older Adults,” *N. Engl. J. Med.*, vol. 0, no. 0,
p. null, Sep. 2020, doi:
[10.1056/NEJMoa2028436](https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa2028436).